docs/docs/core_concepts/context.mdx, before:

---
title: Context & State Management
sidebar: 'docsSidebar'
---
import CodeBlock from '@site/src/theme/CodeBlock';

# Context & State Management

<h2 className="subtitle" style={{marginTop: '-17px', fontSize: '1.1rem', fontWeight: 'normal'}}>
The shared memory that connects everything together across the entire lifetime of a run.
</h2>

---

We've seen how [Runnables](./runnables.mdx) execute and produce [Events](./events.mdx) that stream in real-time. But what happens when you need to modify inputs before they reach a handler, store and share additional data during execution, or process outputs after they're generated?

This is where the **RunContext** comes in - It acts as a centralized container that maintains execution state, enables data sharing between components, tracks usage metrics, and manages the hierarchical relationships between parent and child runs.

## How to Access the RunContext

The RunContext is accessible from anywhere within a Runnable's execution using `get_run_context()`. 

To illustrate this, we'll introduce the Runnable lifecycle hooks. Every Runnable supports two optional hooks:

- **`pre_hook`**: A function that runs before the main handler
- **`post_hook`**: A function that runs after the main handler completes

These hooks demonstrate how different parts of your execution can read and write to the same shared context, enabling powerful data transformation and coordination patterns.

## Pre-hooks: Modifying Input and Adding Context

A `pre_hook` runs before your handler and can both modify input parameters and store additional context data:

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`from datetime import datetime

from timbal.state import get_run_context

def pre_hook():
    run_context = get_run_context()
    # Get input variable and modify it
    greet_name = run_context.get_data(".input.name")
    run_context.set_data(".input.name", greet_name.capitalize())
    # Directly set input variable
    run_context.set_data(".input.location", "Barcelona")
    # Set additional properties
    run_context.set_data(".greet_time", datetime.now())

def greet(name: str, location: str) -> str:
    return f"Hello {name} from {location}!"

greet_tool = Tool(
    name="greet", 
    pre_hook=pre_hook,
    handler=greet,
)

result = await greet_tool(name="alice").collect() # "Hello Alice from Barcelona!"`}/>

Pre-hooks are perfect for:
- **Data Preparation**: Process raw webhook payloads, parse JSON, or normalize input formats
- **Input Enhancement**: Enrich data with additional context from databases or APIs
- **Request Preprocessing**: Extract headers, validate signatures, or decode authentication tokens
- **State Initialization**: Set up execution context, timestamps, or tracking metadata

## Post-hooks: Processing Output After Completion

A `post_hook` runs after your handler and can access both input and output:

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`def post_hook():
    run_context = get_run_context()
    # We can fetch and log any data stored in the context
    greet_time = run_context.get_data(".greet_time")
    print(f"Greeting at {greet_time}")
    # We can also modify the output of the handler directly
    run_context.set_data(".output", "Greeting overridden!")

greet_tool = Tool(
    name="greet", 
    pre_hook=pre_hook,
    handler=greet,
    post_hook=post_hook,
)

result = await greet_tool(name="alice").collect() # "Greeting overridden!"`}/>

Post-hooks are perfect for:
- **Logging**: Record execution details and results
- **Metadata Storage**: Store processing metrics, timestamps, or analysis data
- **Output Modification**: Transform or enrich the final result
- **Cleanup Tasks**: Handle resource cleanup or state management

:::success[Real World Applications]
These simple examples show the basics. In practice, hooks excel at:

- **Input manipulation**: Processing webhooks where we don't control the shape of the incoming data.
- **Agent adaptation**: Converting between modalities (audio ↔ text) for different models.

More advanced patterns in the [Agents](../agents) section.
:::

## Hierarchical Data Access

The context uses a hierarchical key format that lets you access data from different levels of execution:

### Current Runnable Scope
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`# Access your own execution data with . prefix
context.get_data(".input.parameter_name")  # Your input parameters
context.get_data(".output")                 # Your output (available in post_hook)
context.get_data(".custom_variable")        # Custom data you stored`}/>

### Parent Runnable Scope
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`# Access parent execution data with .. prefix
context.get_data("..input")       # Parent's input
context.get_data("..output")      # Parent's output
context.get_data("..custom_var")  # Parent's custom data`}/>

## Data Sharing Between Components

When Tools are used within Agents or Workflows, they can share data through the context:

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`# In a multi-step process, access data from other components
context.get_data("step1.output.user_data")    # Data from step1
context.get_data("validation.custom_flags")   # Custom data from validation step
context.get_data("..shared_session_data")     # Data from parent Agent/Workflow`}/>

## The Source of Traces

The RunContext is also where **Traces** are stored. While [Events](./events.mdx) stream temporarily during execution, the RunContext captures everything permanently for later analysis and debugging.

This trace data will be covered in detail in the [Tracing](./tracing.mdx) section, where you'll see how this persistent data enables complete observability into your Runnable executions.

> **What's Next**: The [Tracing](./tracing.mdx) section will show you how the RunContext creates permanent execution records that enable debugging, analysis, and observability.

Commit message:

docs: reorganize tracing docs to clarify relationship between events and traces

docs/docs/core_concepts/context.mdx, after:

---
title: Context & State Management
sidebar: 'docsSidebar'
---
import CodeBlock from '@site/src/theme/CodeBlock';

# Context & State Management

<h2 className="subtitle" style={{marginTop: '-17px', fontSize: '1.1rem', fontWeight: 'normal'}}>
The shared memory that connects everything together across the entire lifetime of a run.
</h2>

---

The RunContext is the central storage and state management system for your runs. Beyond storing traces, it enables data sharing between components, input/output manipulation, and hierarchical data access across parent-child relationships.

## How to Access the RunContext

The RunContext is accessible from anywhere within a Runnable's execution using `get_run_context()`. 

To illustrate this, we'll introduce the Runnable lifecycle hooks. Every Runnable supports two optional hooks:

- **`pre_hook`**: A function that runs before the main handler
- **`post_hook`**: A function that runs after the main handler completes

These hooks demonstrate how different parts of your execution can read and write to the same shared context, enabling powerful data transformation and coordination patterns.

## Pre-hooks: Modifying Input and Adding Context

A `pre_hook` runs before your handler and can both modify input parameters and store additional context data:

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`from datetime import datetime

from timbal.state import get_run_context

def pre_hook():
    run_context = get_run_context()
    # Get input variable and modify it
    greet_name = run_context.get_data(".input.name")
    run_context.set_data(".input.name", greet_name.capitalize())
    # Directly set input variable
    run_context.set_data(".input.location", "Barcelona")
    # Set additional properties
    run_context.set_data(".greet_time", datetime.now())

def greet(name: str, location: str) -> str:
    return f"Hello {name} from {location}!"

greet_tool = Tool(
    name="greet", 
    pre_hook=pre_hook,
    handler=greet,
)

result = await greet_tool(name="alice").collect() # "Hello Alice from Barcelona!"`}/>

Pre-hooks are perfect for:
- **Data Preparation**: Process raw webhook payloads, parse JSON, or normalize input formats
- **Input Enhancement**: Enrich data with additional context from databases or APIs
- **Request Preprocessing**: Extract headers, validate signatures, or decode authentication tokens
- **State Initialization**: Set up execution context, timestamps, or tracking metadata

## Post-hooks: Processing Output After Completion

A `post_hook` runs after your handler and can access both input and output:

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`def post_hook():
    run_context = get_run_context()
    # We can fetch and log any data stored in the context
    greet_time = run_context.get_data(".greet_time")
    print(f"Greeting at {greet_time}")
    # We can also modify the output of the handler directly
    run_context.set_data(".output", "Greeting overridden!")

greet_tool = Tool(
    name="greet", 
    pre_hook=pre_hook,
    handler=greet,
    post_hook=post_hook,
)

result = await greet_tool(name="alice").collect() # "Greeting overridden!"`}/>

Post-hooks are perfect for:
- **Logging**: Record execution details and results
- **Metadata Storage**: Store processing metrics, timestamps, or analysis data
- **Output Modification**: Transform or enrich the final result
- **Cleanup Tasks**: Handle resource cleanup or state management

:::success[Real World Applications]
These simple examples show the basics. In practice, hooks excel at:

- **Input manipulation**: Processing webhooks where we don't control the shape of the incoming data.
- **Agent adaptation**: Converting between modalities (audio ↔ text) for different models.

More advanced patterns in the [Agents](../agents) section.
:::

## Hierarchical Data Access

The context uses a hierarchical key format that lets you access data from different levels of execution:

### Current Runnable Scope
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`# Access your own execution data with . prefix
context.get_data(".input.parameter_name")  # Your input parameters
context.get_data(".output")                 # Your output (available in post_hook)
context.get_data(".custom_variable")        # Custom data you stored`}/>

### Parent Runnable Scope
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`# Access parent execution data with .. prefix
context.get_data("..input")       # Parent's input
context.get_data("..output")      # Parent's output
context.get_data("..custom_var")  # Parent's custom data`}/>

## Data Sharing Between Components

When Tools are used within Agents or Workflows, they can share data through the context:

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`# In a multi-step process, access data from other components
context.get_data("step1.output.user_data")    # Data from step1
context.get_data("validation.custom_flags")   # Custom data from validation step
context.get_data("..shared_session_data")     # Data from parent Agent/Workflow`}/>
