docs/agents/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Master proven strategies for designing advanced, specialized AI agents using an architecture that work together seamlessly to tackle complex challenges"
---

## What are Agents?

Agents are autonomous execution units that **orchestrate LLM interactions with tool calling**. 

Without tools, an agent functions as a basic LLM. The simplest agent requires just a **name** and **model**:

```python
from timbal import Agent

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5"
)  # That's it! You've created your first agent!
```

<Tip>
For a full step-by-step guide, check the [quickstart section](/quickstart) or see practical examples in the [examples section](/examples).
</Tip>

## Model Providers

You can specify any model using the "provider/model" format. See all supported models in [Model Capabilities](../model_capabilities).

Some models require specific parameters (like `max_tokens` for Claude). Use `model_params` to pass any additional model configuration: 

```python highlight={4}
agent = Agent(
    name="claude_agent",
    model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest",
    model_params={
        "max_tokens": 1024
    }
)
```

**Note:** Make sure to define all required environment variables—such as the API key model that you need—in your `.env` file.

```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_claude_api_key
```

Define tools as Python functions - the framework handles schema generation, parameter validation, and execution orchestration.

## Running Agents

Execute agents by calling them with a `prompt` parameter and using `.collect()` to get the result:

```python
response = await agent(
    prompt="What is the capital of Germany?"
).collect()
```

### Streaming Events

For real-time processing, you can stream events as they happen:

```python
async for event in agent(prompt="Hello"):
    print(event)
```

## Input

Agents communicate through `Message` objects - Timbal's data structure that standardizes both input and output.

```python highlight={4}
from timbal.types.message import Message

response = await agent(
    prompt=Message.validate("What is the capital of Germany?")
).collect()
```

Agents accept multiple input formats, automatically converting them to `Message` objects:

```python highlight={3, 8, 13}
# String
response = await agent(
    prompt="What's the weather?"
).collect()

# File - Timbal type 
response = await agent(
    prompt=File.validate("image.png")
).collect()

# List
response = await agent(
    prompt=["Describe this image", File.validate("image.png")]
).collect()
```

### Passing Input Parameters

You can pass custom input parameters when calling an agent. Access these values anywhere in your agent (tools, system prompts, hooks) using `get_run_context().current_span().input`:

```python
from timbal import Agent, Tool
from timbal.state import get_run_context

def get_user_info():
    span = get_run_context().current_span()
    user_id = span.input.get("user_id")
    role = span.input.get("role")
    return f"User {user_id} with role {role}"

agent = Agent(
    name="user_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-4o-mini",
    tools=[Tool(handler=get_user_info)]
)

# Pass custom inputs
response = await agent(
    prompt="Who am I?",
    user_id="123",
    role="admin"
).collect()
```

The tool can access `user_id` and `role` from the input parameters. Input parameters work with both `.collect()` and streaming.

<Note>
For more information about accessing input parameters and using the run context, see the [Context & State Management](/core-concepts/context) page.
</Note>

### Overriding Model Configuration

What if you want to change the model, `max_tokens`, or `thinking` for each run? Instead of creating multiple agents, you can pass these as input parameters. This is useful for A/B testing different models, adjusting token limits per request, or dynamically selecting models based on task complexity.

```python
# Agent with default values
agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-4o-mini",  # Default model
    model_params={"max_tokens": 1024}  # Default max_tokens
)

# Override model: was "openai/gpt-4o-mini", now "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest"
response = await agent(
    prompt="What is the capital of Germany?",
    model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest"
).collect()

# Override max_tokens: was 1024, now 2048
async for event in agent(
    prompt="What is the capital of Germany?",
    max_tokens=2048
):
    print(event)

# Override thinking (provider-specific format)
# For OpenAI: {"effort": "high", "summary": true}
response = await agent(
    prompt="Solve this complex problem",
    model="openai/gpt-4o",
    thinking={"effort": "high", "summary": True}
).collect()

# For Anthropic: {"budget_tokens": 10000}
response = await agent(
    prompt="Solve this complex problem",
    model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest",
    thinking={
        "type": "enabled",
        "budget_tokens": 10000}
).collect()
```

<Warning>
The parameter names `model`, `max_tokens`, and `thinking` are reserved and will affect model configuration when passed as input. These parameters will not be available as regular input to your agent. If you need to pass custom data without changing the actual model configuration, use different parameter names (e.g., `data_model` instead of `model` if you want to pass a data model name).
</Warning>

## Output

Calling `.collect()` returns an `OutputEvent` containing the agent's response. Access the `Message` via the `.output` property:

<Note>
Learn more about events in [Events & Streaming](/core-concepts/events).
</Note>

```python
result = await agent(prompt="What's 2+2?").collect()

# result is an OutputEvent
print(result.output)
# Message(role=assistant, content=[TextContent(type='text', text='2 + 2 = 4.')])

# Access the message text
print(result.output.content[0].text)
# "2 + 2 = 4."
```

## Messages

Messages are the structured data format that agents use to communicate. They contain a role and content, with automatic handling of different content types and provider compatibility.

```python
from timbal.types.message import Message
```

Messages contain a **role** and **content**:

**Role Types:**
- **user** - Messages from the user
- **assistant** - Messages from the AI agent
- **system** - System instructions and context
- **tool** - Tool execution results

**Content Types:**
- **TextContent** - Plain text messages
- **FileContent** - Files like PDFs, images, documents
- **ToolCallContent** - Function calls to tools
- **ToolResultContent** - Results from tool executions

Messages can contain different types of content - text, files, tool calls, and tool results. The framework automatically handles complex content structures:

```python
from timbal.types.content import FileContent, TextContent

# Message with text and file
mixed_message = Message(
    role="user",
    content=[
        TextContent(text="Analyze this document:"),
        FileContent(path=File.validate("report.pdf"))
    ]
)
```

The same message above can be created easily using `Message.validate()`:

```python
message = Message.validate([
    "Summarize this document:",
    File.validate("quarterly_report.pdf")
])
```

## Files

Agents can process files directly through the message content system. The framework automatically handles file reading, content extraction, and formatting for the AI model.

```python
from timbal.types.file import File
```

The framework supports common document and media formats:

- **Text files** (.txt, .md) - Direct content inclusion
- **PDFs** (.pdf) - Text extraction with structure preservation  
- **Images** (.png, .jpg, .gif) - Visual analysis through vision-capable models
- **Spreadsheets** (.xlsx, .csv) - Structured data representation
- **Documents** (.docx) - Text and formatting extraction


Files are automatically converted to Timbal `File` objects using `File.validate()`:

```python
file = File.validate("quarterly_report.pdf")
```

Commit message:

docs: add thinking section, improve workflows, agent capabilities and examples.

docs/agents/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Master proven strategies for designing advanced, specialized AI agents using an architecture that work together seamlessly to tackle complex challenges"
---

## What are Agents?

Agents are autonomous execution units that **orchestrate LLM interactions with tool calling**. 

Without tools, an agent functions as a basic LLM. The simplest agent requires just a **name** and **model**:

```python
from timbal import Agent

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5"
)  # That's it! You've created your first agent!
```

<Tip>
For a full step-by-step guide, check the [quickstart section](/quickstart) or see practical examples in the [examples section](/examples).
</Tip>

## Model Providers

You can specify any model using the "provider/model" format. See all supported models in [Model Capabilities](../model_capabilities).

Some models support advanced capabilities like [thinking/reasoning](/agents/thinking), which enables extended reasoning processes for complex problem-solving.

Some models require specific parameters (like `max_tokens` for Claude). Use `model_params` to pass any additional model configuration: 

```python highlight={4}
agent = Agent(
    name="claude_agent",
    model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest",
    model_params={
        "max_tokens": 1024
    }
)
```

**Note:** Make sure to define all required environment variables—such as the API key model that you need—in your `.env` file.

```bash
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_claude_api_key
```

Define tools as Python functions - the framework handles schema generation, parameter validation, and execution orchestration.

## Running Agents

Execute agents by calling them with a `prompt` parameter and using `.collect()` to get the result:

```python
response = await agent(
    prompt="What is the capital of Germany?"
).collect()
```

### Streaming Events

For real-time processing, you can stream events as they happen:

```python
async for event in agent(prompt="Hello"):
    print(event)
```

## Input

Agents communicate through `Message` objects - Timbal's data structure that standardizes both input and output.

```python highlight={4}
from timbal.types.message import Message

response = await agent(
    prompt=Message.validate("What is the capital of Germany?")
).collect()
```

Agents accept multiple input formats, automatically converting them to `Message` objects:

```python highlight={3, 8, 13}
# String
response = await agent(
    prompt="What's the weather?"
).collect()

# File - Timbal type 
response = await agent(
    prompt=File.validate("image.png")
).collect()

# List
response = await agent(
    prompt=["Describe this image", File.validate("image.png")]
).collect()
```

### Passing Input Parameters

You can pass custom input parameters when calling an agent. Access these values anywhere in your agent (tools, system prompts, hooks) using `get_run_context().current_span().input`:

```python
from timbal import Agent, Tool
from timbal.state import get_run_context

def get_user_info():
    span = get_run_context().current_span()
    user_id = span.input.get("user_id")
    role = span.input.get("role")
    return f"User {user_id} with role {role}"

agent = Agent(
    name="user_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-4o-mini",
    tools=[Tool(handler=get_user_info)]
)

# Pass custom inputs
response = await agent(
    prompt="Who am I?",
    user_id="123",
    role="admin"
).collect()
```

The tool can access `user_id` and `role` from the input parameters. Input parameters work with both `.collect()` and streaming.

<Note>
For more information about accessing input parameters and using the run context, see the [Context & State Management](/core-concepts/context) page.
</Note>

### Overriding Model Configuration

What if you want to change the model, `max_tokens`, or `thinking` for each run? Instead of creating multiple agents, you can pass these as input parameters. This is useful for A/B testing different models, adjusting token limits per request, or dynamically selecting models based on task complexity.

```python
# Agent with default values
agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-4o-mini",  # Default model
    model_params={"max_tokens": 1024}  # Default max_tokens
)

# Override model: was "openai/gpt-4o-mini", now "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest"
response = await agent(
    prompt="What is the capital of Germany?",
    model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest"
).collect()

# Override max_tokens: was 1024, now 2048
async for event in agent(
    prompt="What is the capital of Germany?",
    max_tokens=2048
):
    print(event)

# Override thinking (provider-specific format)
# For OpenAI: {"effort": "high", "summary": true}
response = await agent(
    prompt="Solve this complex problem",
    model="openai/gpt-4o",
    thinking={"effort": "high", "summary": True}
).collect()

# For Anthropic: {"budget_tokens": 10000}
response = await agent(
    prompt="Solve this complex problem",
    model="anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-latest",
    thinking={
        "type": "enabled",
        "budget_tokens": 10000}
).collect()
```

<Warning>
The parameter names `model`, `max_tokens`, and `thinking` are reserved and will affect model configuration when passed as input. These parameters will not be available as regular input to your agent. If you need to pass custom data without changing the actual model configuration, use different parameter names (e.g., `data_model` instead of `model` if you want to pass a data model name).
</Warning>

## Output

Calling `.collect()` returns an `OutputEvent` containing the agent's response. Access the `Message` via the `.output` property:

<Note>
Learn more about events in [Events & Streaming](/core-concepts/events).
</Note>

```python
result = await agent(prompt="What's 2+2?").collect()

# result is an OutputEvent
print(result.output)
# Message(role=assistant, content=[TextContent(type='text', text='2 + 2 = 4.')])

# You can access content directly
print(result.output.content[0].text)
# "2 + 2 = 4."

# However, the best way to get text is using collect_text()
print(result.output.collect_text())
# "2 + 2 = 4."
```

<Warning>
**Important:** When using models with [thinking/reasoning](/agents/thinking) enabled, the content array structure changes:
- `content[0]` will contain the thinking/reasoning content
- `content[1]` will contain the actual text response

Directly accessing `result.output.content[0].text` may return thinking content instead of the response text. Always use `collect_text()` to reliably extract the text response, regardless of whether thinking is enabled.
</Warning>

## Messages

Messages are the structured data format that agents use to communicate. They contain a role and content, with automatic handling of different content types and provider compatibility.

```python
from timbal.types.message import Message
```

Messages contain a **role** and **content**:

**Role Types:**
- **user** - Messages from the user
- **assistant** - Messages from the AI agent
- **system** - System instructions and context
- **tool** - Tool execution results

**Content Types:**
- **TextContent** - Plain text messages
- **FileContent** - Files like PDFs, images, documents
- **ToolCallContent** - Function calls to tools
- **ToolResultContent** - Results from tool executions

Messages can contain different types of content - text, files, tool calls, and tool results. The framework automatically handles complex content structures:

```python
from timbal.types.content import FileContent, TextContent

# Message with text and file
mixed_message = Message(
    role="user",
    content=[
        TextContent(text="Analyze this document:"),
        FileContent(path=File.validate("report.pdf"))
    ]
)
```

The same message above can be created easily using `Message.validate()`:

```python
message = Message.validate([
    "Summarize this document:",
    File.validate("quarterly_report.pdf")
])
```

## Files

Agents can process files directly through the message content system. The framework automatically handles file reading, content extraction, and formatting for the AI model.

```python
from timbal.types.file import File
```

The framework supports common document and media formats:

- **Text files** (.txt, .md) - Direct content inclusion
- **PDFs** (.pdf) - Text extraction with structure preservation  
- **Images** (.png, .jpg, .gif) - Visual analysis through vision-capable models
- **Spreadsheets** (.xlsx, .csv) - Structured data representation
- **Documents** (.docx) - Text and formatting extraction


Files are automatically converted to Timbal `File` objects using `File.validate()`:

```python
file = File.validate("quarterly_report.pdf")
```
