docs/evals/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Automated testing framework for Timbal agents and runnables"
---

## What are Evals?

Evals are automated tests that validate your agent's behavior, outputs, and execution patterns. They help you ensure your agents perform correctly and consistently across different scenarios.

## Why Evals Matter

AI agents are non-deterministic - the same input can yield different results. Evals help you:

- **Validate outputs**: Ensure agents produce correct responses
- **Check tool usage**: Verify agents use the right tools with correct inputs
- **Monitor performance**: Track execution time and token usage
- **Catch regressions**: Prevent breaking changes during development
- **Test execution patterns**: Validate sequential and parallel tool execution

## How Evals Work

Timbal's eval system uses a YAML-based test definition format with a powerful validator system:

```yaml
- name: time_in_madrid
  description: Test that agent returns the time in Madrid
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  tags: ["datetime", "smoke"]
  timeout: 30000
  
  params:
    prompt: "what time is it in madrid"
  
  output:
    type!: "string"
    contains!: ":"
    pattern!: "\\d{1,2}:\\d{2}"
  
  elapsed:
    lt!: 6000
  
  seq!:
    - llm
    - get_datetime
    - llm
```

### Core Components

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Validators" icon="check" href="/evals/validators">
    20+ validators for checking outputs, patterns, types, and more
  </Card>
  <Card title="Flow Validators" icon="arrow-right" href="/evals/validators/flow">
    Validate execution sequences and parallel tool calls
  </Card>
  <Card title="LLM Validators" icon="brain" href="/evals/validators/llm">
    AI-powered semantic validation for natural language
  </Card>
  <Card title="CLI" icon="terminal" href="/evals/running-evals">
    Command-line interface for running and discovering evals
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Quick Start

### 1. Create a test file

Create a file named `eval_greeting.yaml`:

```yaml
- name: greeting_test
  description: Verify the agent greets users appropriately
  runnable: agent.py::my_agent
  
  params:
    prompt: "Hi there!"
  
  output:
    not_null!: true
    type!: "string"
    semantic!: "A polite greeting that acknowledges the user"
  
  elapsed:
    lt!: 5000
```

### 2. Run your evals

```bash
python -m timbal.evals.cli path/to/eval_greeting.yaml
```

### 3. View results

The CLI displays pytest-style output with pass/fail status, duration, and detailed failure information:

```
========================= timbal evals =========================
collected 1 eval

eval_greeting.yaml
  greeting_test ......................................... PASSED (0.45s)
    tags: greeting, basic
    ├── output
    │   ├── not_null! ✓
    │   ├── type! ✓
    │   └── semantic! ✓
    └── elapsed
        └── lt! ✓

========================= 1 passed in 0.45s =========================
```

## Eval Structure

Each eval consists of:

| Field | Description | Required |
|-------|-------------|----------|
| `name` | Unique identifier for the eval | Yes |
| `runnable` | Path to the runnable (`file.py::name`) | Yes |
| `params` | Input parameters for the runnable | No |
| `description` | Human-readable description | No |
| `tags` | List of tags for filtering | No |
| `timeout` | Maximum execution time in milliseconds | No |
| `output` | Validators for the final output | No |
| `elapsed` | Validators for total execution time | No |
| `seq!` | Sequence flow validator | No |

<Note>
Eval names must be unique across all eval files. The CLI will error if duplicate names are found.
</Note>

See [Writing Evals](/evals/writing-evals) for the complete syntax reference.

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Writing Evals" icon="pen" href="/evals/writing-evals">
    Learn the full eval syntax and best practices
  </Card>
  <Card title="Validators Reference" icon="book" href="/evals/validators">
    Complete reference for all validators
  </Card>
  <Card title="Running Evals" icon="play" href="/evals/running-evals">
    CLI options and CI/CD integration
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

Commit message:

docs: update quickstart and evals documentation

docs/evals/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Automated testing framework for Timbal agents and runnables"
---

## What are Evals?

Evals are automated tests that validate your agent's behavior, outputs, and execution patterns. They help you ensure your agents perform correctly and consistently across different scenarios.

## Why Evals Matter

AI agents are non-deterministic - the same input can yield different results. Evals help you:

- **Validate outputs**: Ensure agents produce correct responses
- **Check tool usage**: Verify agents use the right tools with correct inputs
- **Monitor performance**: Track execution time and token usage
- **Catch regressions**: Prevent breaking changes during development
- **Test execution patterns**: Validate sequential and parallel tool execution

## How Evals Work

Timbal's eval system uses a YAML-based test definition format with a powerful validator system:

```yaml
- name: time_in_madrid
  description: Test that agent returns the time in Madrid
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  tags: ["datetime", "smoke"]
  timeout: 30000
  
  params:
    prompt: "what time is it in madrid"
  
  output:
    type!: "string"
    contains!: ":"
    pattern!: "\\d{1,2}:\\d{2}"
  
  elapsed:
    lt!: 6000
  
  seq!:
    - llm
    - get_datetime
    - llm
```

### Core Components

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Validators" icon="check" href="/evals/validators">
    20+ validators for checking outputs, patterns, types, and more
  </Card>
  <Card title="Flow Validators" icon="arrow-right" href="/evals/validators/flow">
    Validate execution sequences and parallel tool calls
  </Card>
  <Card title="LLM Validators" icon="brain" href="/evals/validators/llm">
    AI-powered semantic validation for natural language
  </Card>
  <Card title="CLI" icon="terminal" href="/evals/running-evals">
    Command-line interface for running and discovering evals
  </Card>
</CardGroup>

## Prerequisites

Before running evals, ensure the following environment variables are set:

- `TIMBAL_API_KEY` - Your Timbal API key
- `TIMBAL_API_HOST` - The Timbal API host URL
- `TIMBAL_ORG_ID` - Your organization ID

These can be set in your environment or in a `.env` file in your project directory.

## Quick Start

### 1. Create a test file

Create a file named `eval_greeting.yaml`:

```yaml
- name: greeting_test
  description: Verify the agent greets users appropriately
  runnable: agent.py::my_agent
  
  params:
    prompt: "Hi there!"
  
  output:
    not_null!: true
    type!: "string"
    semantic!: "A polite greeting that acknowledges the user"
  
  elapsed:
    lt!: 5000
```

### 2. Run your evals

```bash
python -m timbal.evals.cli path/to/eval_greeting.yaml
```

### 3. View results

The CLI displays pytest-style output with pass/fail status, duration, and detailed failure information:

```
========================= timbal evals =========================
collected 1 eval

eval_greeting.yaml
  greeting_test ......................................... PASSED (0.45s)
    tags: greeting, basic
    ├── output
    │   ├── not_null! ✓
    │   ├── type! ✓
    │   └── semantic! ✓
    └── elapsed
        └── lt! ✓

========================= 1 passed in 0.45s =========================
```

## Eval Structure

Each eval consists of:

| Field | Description | Required |
|-------|-------------|----------|
| `name` | Unique identifier for the eval | Yes |
| `runnable` | Path to the runnable (`file.py::name`) | Yes |
| `params` | Input parameters for the runnable | No |
| `description` | Human-readable description | No |
| `tags` | List of tags for filtering | No |
| `timeout` | Maximum execution time in milliseconds | No |
| `output` | Validators for the final output | No |
| `elapsed` | Validators for total execution time | No |
| `seq!` | Sequence flow validator | No |

<Note>
Eval names must be unique across all eval files. The CLI will error if duplicate names are found.
</Note>

See [Writing Evals](/evals/writing-evals) for the complete syntax reference.

## Next Steps

<CardGroup cols={2}>
  <Card title="Writing Evals" icon="pen" href="/evals/writing-evals">
    Learn the full eval syntax and best practices
  </Card>
  <Card title="Validators Reference" icon="book" href="/evals/validators">
    Complete reference for all validators
  </Card>
  <Card title="Running Evals" icon="play" href="/evals/running-evals">
    CLI options and CI/CD integration
  </Card>
</CardGroup>
