docs/evals/writing-evals.mdx, before:

---
title: "Writing Evals"
description: "Learn how to write effective evals for your Timbal agents"
---

This guide covers the complete syntax for writing evals, from basic tests to complex multi-validator scenarios.

## File Structure

Evals are defined in YAML files. Each file can contain multiple eval definitions:

```yaml
# eval_search.yaml
- name: basic_search
  description: Test basic product search
  runnable: agents/search.py::search_agent
  
  params:
    prompt: "Find me a laptop"
  
  output:
    contains!: "laptop"
    type!: "string"

- name: search_with_filters
  description: Test search with price filters
  runnable: agents/search.py::search_agent
  
  params:
    prompt: "Find laptops under $1000"
  
  output:
    pattern!: "\\$\\d+"
```

## Eval Definition

### Required Fields

```yaml
- name: my_eval_name
  runnable: path/to/agent.py::agent_name
```

### Optional Fields

```yaml
- name: complete_example
  description: "A thorough test of greeting behavior"
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  tags:
    - greeting
    - smoke-test
  timeout: 30000            # Milliseconds
  env:
    API_KEY: "test-key"
  
  params:
    prompt: "Hello"
  
  output:
    semantic!: "Friendly greeting"
  
  elapsed:
    lt!: 5000
```

## Params Structure

The `params` field contains input parameters passed to your runnable:

### Simple Prompt

```yaml
params:
  prompt: "What's the weather like?"
```

### With Messages

```yaml
params:
  messages:
    - role: user
      content: "What's the weather like?"
```

### Additional Parameters

Pass any additional parameters your agent accepts:

```yaml
params:
  prompt: "Search for products"
  max_results: 10
  include_reviews: true
  category: "electronics"
```

## Validating Output

The `output` section validates the final response from your agent:

```yaml
output:
  not_null!: true
  type!: "string"
  min_length!: 10
  contains!: "success"
  not_contains!: "error"
  pattern!: "Order #\\d{6}"
  semantic!: "A confirmation message with order details"
```

Multiple validators can be combined - all must pass.

## Validating Timing

The `elapsed` section validates total execution time in milliseconds:

```yaml
elapsed:
  lt!: 5000       # Less than 5 seconds
  gte!: 100       # At least 100ms (not instant)
```

## Validating Tool Spans

Validate specific tools by their name:

```yaml
get_datetime:
  input:
    timezone:
      eq!: "Europe/Madrid"
      starts_with!: "Europe/"
  output:
    type!: "string"
    pattern!: "^\\d{4}-\\d{2}-\\d{2}"
  elapsed:
    lt!: 1000

search_products:
  input:
    query:
      contains!: "laptop"
    limit:
      lte!: 100
  output:
    type!: "array"
    min_length!: 1
```

## Validating Token Usage

Access usage metrics on LLM spans:

```yaml
llm:
  usage:
    input_tokens:
      lte!: 500
    output_tokens:
      lte!: 1000
```

For multi-model scenarios, tokens are automatically summed across models.

## Flow Validators

### Sequence Validation

Use `seq!` to validate the order of tool execution:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - search_products
  - llm
```

With wildcards for flexible matching:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - ...              # Any number of spans
  - send_email
```

### Parallel Validation

Use `parallel!` to validate concurrent execution:

```yaml
parallel!:
  - get_weather
  - get_datetime
  - get_stock_price
```

### Nested Flow Validation

Combine sequence and parallel:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - parallel!:
      - fetch_user
      - fetch_orders
  - llm
```

### Span Validation Within Sequence

Validate span inputs/outputs within the sequence:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm:
      elapsed:
        lt!: 3000
      usage:
        input_tokens:
          lte!: 500
  
  - get_datetime:
      input:
        timezone:
          eq!: "Europe/Madrid"
      output:
        type!: "string"
  
  - llm
```

## Complete Example

```yaml
- name: time_query
  description: "Test time query with validation"
  runnable: "agent.py::agent"
  tags: ["datetime", "smoke"]
  timeout: 30000
  
  params:
    prompt: "what time is it in madrid"
  
  # Validate final output
  output:
    type!: "string"
    min_length!: 10
    contains!: ":"
    pattern!: "\\d{1,2}:\\d{2}"
    semantic!: "a time response mentioning Madrid"
  
  # Validate timing
  elapsed:
    lt!: 6000
  
  # Validate execution sequence
  seq!:
    - llm:
        elapsed:
          lte!: 40000
        usage:
          input_tokens:
            lte!: 1000
    
    - get_datetime:
        input:
          timezone:
            eq!: "Europe/Madrid"
            starts_with!: "Europe/"
        output:
          type!: "string"
          pattern!: "^\\d{4}-\\d{2}-\\d{2}"
    
    - llm
```

## Wildcard Patterns in Sequences

| Pattern | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `..` | Exactly 1 span |
| `...` | Any number of spans (0 or more) |
| `n..m` | Between n and m spans |
| `n..` | At least n spans |
| `..m` | At most m spans |

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - 1..3              # 1 to 3 spans
  - validate_input
  - ...               # Any number
  - send_response
```

## The `any!` Pattern

Match flexible patterns within sequences:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - any!:
      min: 1
      max: 3
      contains:
        - validate_email
        - validate_phone
      not_contains:
        - delete_user
  - process_request
```

## Tags and Filtering

Use tags to organize and filter evals:

```yaml
- name: smoke_test_greeting
  tags:
    - smoke
    - greeting
    - quick
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  params:
    prompt: "Hi"
  output:
    not_null!: true
```

## Environment Variables

Set environment variables for specific evals:

```yaml
- name: test_with_api_key
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  env:
    API_KEY: "test-key-123"
    DEBUG: "true"
  params:
    prompt: "Fetch data"
  output:
    not_null!: true
```

## Best Practices

<Accordion title="Use descriptive names">
Names should clearly indicate what's being tested:

```yaml
# Good
- name: search_returns_relevant_products
- name: handles_empty_search_results
- name: validates_timezone_input

# Avoid
- name: test1
- name: search_test
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Combine validators effectively">
Use multiple validators to thoroughly test behavior:

```yaml
output:
  not_null!: true
  type!: "string"
  min_length!: 50
  contains!: "product"
  not_contains!: "error"
  semantic!: "Product recommendations with prices"
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Validate both output and execution">
Don't just check the output - validate how the agent got there:

```yaml
output:
  semantic!: "Weather information for Madrid"

seq!:
  - llm
  - get_weather:
      input:
        city:
          eq!: "Madrid"
  - llm
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Use semantic validators for natural language">
For outputs that can vary in wording but should convey the same meaning:

```yaml
# Instead of exact matching
output:
  eq!: "The current time in Madrid is 14:30."

# Use semantic validation
output:
  semantic!: "Indicates the current time in Madrid"
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Test edge cases">
Create specific evals for error conditions:

```yaml
- name: handles_invalid_timezone
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  params:
    prompt: "what time is it in xyzland"
  output:
    semantic!: "Indicates the timezone or location is not recognized"
```
</Accordion>

## File Naming Conventions

Timbal discovers eval files matching these patterns:

- `eval*.yaml` - e.g., `eval_search.yaml`, `evals.yaml`
- `*eval.yaml` - e.g., `search_eval.yaml`, `my_eval.yaml`

Organize evals by feature or agent:

```
evals/
├── eval_search.yaml
├── eval_support.yaml
├── eval_checkout.yaml
└── regression/
    ├── eval_smoke.yaml
    └── eval_full.yaml
```

Commit message:

Update CLI module with new features for eval filtering and name validation

docs/evals/writing-evals.mdx, after:

---
title: "Writing Evals"
description: "Learn how to write effective evals for your Timbal agents"
---

This guide covers the complete syntax for writing evals, from basic tests to complex multi-validator scenarios.

## File Structure

Evals are defined in YAML files. Each file can contain multiple eval definitions:

```yaml
# eval_search.yaml
- name: basic_search
  description: Test basic product search
  runnable: agents/search.py::search_agent
  
  params:
    prompt: "Find me a laptop"
  
  output:
    contains!: "laptop"
    type!: "string"

- name: search_with_filters
  description: Test search with price filters
  runnable: agents/search.py::search_agent
  
  params:
    prompt: "Find laptops under $1000"
  
  output:
    pattern!: "\\$\\d+"
```

## Eval Definition

### Required Fields

```yaml
- name: my_eval_name
  runnable: path/to/agent.py::agent_name
```

<Warning>
Eval names must be unique across all eval files in your project. The CLI will error if duplicate names are found.
</Warning>

### Optional Fields

```yaml
- name: complete_example
  description: "A thorough test of greeting behavior"
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  tags:
    - greeting
    - smoke-test
  timeout: 30000            # Milliseconds
  env:
    API_KEY: "test-key"
  
  params:
    prompt: "Hello"
  
  output:
    semantic!: "Friendly greeting"
  
  elapsed:
    lt!: 5000
```

## Params Structure

The `params` field contains input parameters passed to your runnable:

### Simple Prompt

```yaml
params:
  prompt: "What's the weather like?"
```

### With Messages

```yaml
params:
  messages:
    - role: user
      content: "What's the weather like?"
```

### Additional Parameters

Pass any additional parameters your agent accepts:

```yaml
params:
  prompt: "Search for products"
  max_results: 10
  include_reviews: true
  category: "electronics"
```

## Validating Output

The `output` section validates the final response from your agent:

```yaml
output:
  not_null!: true
  type!: "string"
  min_length!: 10
  contains!: "success"
  not_contains!: "error"
  pattern!: "Order #\\d{6}"
  semantic!: "A confirmation message with order details"
```

Multiple validators can be combined - all must pass.

## Validating Timing

The `elapsed` section validates total execution time in milliseconds:

```yaml
elapsed:
  lt!: 5000       # Less than 5 seconds
  gte!: 100       # At least 100ms (not instant)
```

## Validating Tool Spans

Validate specific tools by their name:

```yaml
get_datetime:
  input:
    timezone:
      eq!: "Europe/Madrid"
      starts_with!: "Europe/"
  output:
    type!: "string"
    pattern!: "^\\d{4}-\\d{2}-\\d{2}"
  elapsed:
    lt!: 1000

search_products:
  input:
    query:
      contains!: "laptop"
    limit:
      lte!: 100
  output:
    type!: "array"
    min_length!: 1
```

## Validating Token Usage

Access usage metrics on LLM spans:

```yaml
llm:
  usage:
    input_tokens:
      lte!: 500
    output_tokens:
      lte!: 1000
```

For multi-model scenarios, tokens are automatically summed across models.

## Flow Validators

### Sequence Validation

Use `seq!` to validate the order of tool execution:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - search_products
  - llm
```

With wildcards for flexible matching:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - ...              # Any number of spans
  - send_email
```

### Parallel Validation

Use `parallel!` to validate concurrent execution:

```yaml
parallel!:
  - get_weather
  - get_datetime
  - get_stock_price
```

### Nested Flow Validation

Combine sequence and parallel:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - parallel!:
      - fetch_user
      - fetch_orders
  - llm
```

### Span Validation Within Sequence

Validate span inputs/outputs within the sequence:

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm:
      elapsed:
        lt!: 3000
      usage:
        input_tokens:
          lte!: 500
  
  - get_datetime:
      input:
        timezone:
          eq!: "Europe/Madrid"
      output:
        type!: "string"
  
  - llm
```

## Complete Example

```yaml
- name: time_query
  description: "Test time query with validation"
  runnable: "agent.py::agent"
  tags: ["datetime", "smoke"]
  timeout: 30000
  
  params:
    prompt: "what time is it in madrid"
  
  # Validate final output
  output:
    type!: "string"
    min_length!: 10
    contains!: ":"
    pattern!: "\\d{1,2}:\\d{2}"
    semantic!: "a time response mentioning Madrid"
  
  # Validate timing
  elapsed:
    lt!: 6000
  
  # Validate execution sequence
  seq!:
    - llm:
        elapsed:
          lte!: 40000
        usage:
          input_tokens:
            lte!: 1000
    
    - get_datetime:
        input:
          timezone:
            eq!: "Europe/Madrid"
            starts_with!: "Europe/"
        output:
          type!: "string"
          pattern!: "^\\d{4}-\\d{2}-\\d{2}"
    
    - llm
```

## Wildcard Patterns in Sequences

| Pattern | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `..` | Exactly 1 span |
| `...` | Any number of spans (0 or more) |
| `n..m` | Between n and m spans |
| `n..` | At least n spans |
| `..m` | At most m spans |

```yaml
seq!:
  - llm
  - 1..3              # 1 to 3 spans
  - validate_input
  - ...               # Any number
  - send_response
```

## Tags and Filtering

Use tags to organize and filter evals:

```yaml
- name: smoke_test_greeting
  tags:
    - smoke
    - greeting
    - quick
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  params:
    prompt: "Hi"
  output:
    not_null!: true
```

## Environment Variables

Set environment variables for specific evals:

```yaml
- name: test_with_api_key
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  env:
    API_KEY: "test-key-123"
    DEBUG: "true"
  params:
    prompt: "Fetch data"
  output:
    not_null!: true
```

## Best Practices

<Accordion title="Use descriptive names">
Names should clearly indicate what's being tested:

```yaml
# Good
- name: search_returns_relevant_products
- name: handles_empty_search_results
- name: validates_timezone_input

# Avoid
- name: test1
- name: search_test
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Combine validators effectively">
Use multiple validators to thoroughly test behavior:

```yaml
output:
  not_null!: true
  type!: "string"
  min_length!: 50
  contains!: "product"
  not_contains!: "error"
  semantic!: "Product recommendations with prices"
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Validate both output and execution">
Don't just check the output - validate how the agent got there:

```yaml
output:
  semantic!: "Weather information for Madrid"

seq!:
  - llm
  - get_weather:
      input:
        city:
          eq!: "Madrid"
  - llm
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Use semantic validators for natural language">
For outputs that can vary in wording but should convey the same meaning:

```yaml
# Instead of exact matching
output:
  eq!: "The current time in Madrid is 14:30."

# Use semantic validation
output:
  semantic!: "Indicates the current time in Madrid"
```
</Accordion>

<Accordion title="Test edge cases">
Create specific evals for error conditions:

```yaml
- name: handles_invalid_timezone
  runnable: agent.py::agent
  params:
    prompt: "what time is it in xyzland"
  output:
    semantic!: "Indicates the timezone or location is not recognized"
```
</Accordion>

## File Naming Conventions

Timbal discovers eval files matching these patterns:

- `eval*.yaml` - e.g., `eval_search.yaml`, `evals.yaml`
- `*eval.yaml` - e.g., `search_eval.yaml`, `my_eval.yaml`

Organize evals by feature or agent:

```
evals/
├── eval_search.yaml
├── eval_support.yaml
├── eval_checkout.yaml
└── regression/
    ├── eval_smoke.yaml
    └── eval_full.yaml
```
