docs/docs/workflows/context.md, before:

---
title: Context 
sidebar: 'docsSidebar'
---
import CodeBlock from '@site/src/theme/CodeBlock';

# Context

<h2 className="subtitle" style={{marginTop: '-17px', fontSize: '1.1rem', fontWeight: 'normal'}}>
Store and access information across different steps. 
This enables data sharing, state management, and complex data flows between workflow steps.
</h2>

---



## Step Variables

Every step in a workflow has access to two built-in variables:

- **`.input`**: Contains all the parameters passed to the step. They are accessed through their name.
- **`.output`**: Contains the value(s) returned by the step. Can be a single value, dictionary, array, or custom class.

Additionally, **custom variables** can be linked to a step using the [`get_run_context().set_data`](#the-get_run_context-function) function.

<CodeBlock language="python" highlight="6" code ={`import asyncio
import datetime
from timbal import Workflow, get_run_context

async def process_user_data(user_id: str):
    get_run_context().set_data(".user_status", "active")
    return f"Processed user: {user_id}"

async def send_notification(message: str, user: str):
    timestamp = datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
    return [message, user, timestamp]


workflow = (Workflow(name='user_workflow')
    .step(process_user_data, user_id="user_123")
    .step(send_notification, message="Welcome!", user="user_123")
)`}/>

After the workflow runs, each step has the following variables:

### Step `process_user_data`
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`.input.user_id       = 'user_123'
.output              = 'Processed user: user_123'
.user_status         = 'active'`}/>

### Step `send_notification`
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`.input.message       = 'Welcome!'
.input.user          = 'user_123'
.output[0]           = 'Welcome!'
.output[1]           = 'user_123'
.output[2]           = '2025-01-15 14:30:25'`}/>


## Accessing the Context
### The `get_run_context()` Function
This function is the primary way to interact with workflow context data. It provides access to the current step's context and allows you to read and write data that can be shared across workflow steps.

- **`get_data(path)`**:
  - Returns the value from the specified path.
  - Example: `get_run_context().get_data(".input.user_id")`

- **`set_data(path, value)`**:
  - Creates or updates the value at the given path.
  - Data persists and can be accessed by other steps.
  - Example: `get_run_context().set_data(".user_status", "active")`


### Variable Access
Context paths use a hierarchical structure. Within a workflow, each step has access to its own data as well as the data produced by other steps, since information is shared across the entire process.

- **Current step**: Use `.` to access variables from the current step
  - `.input.parameter_name`
  - `.output`
  - `.custom_variable`

- **Parent step**: Use `..` to access data from the parent step in the workflow
  - `..output`
  - `..custom_variable`

- **Neighbour steps**: Use the step name to access data from any neighbour step
  - `step_name.output`
  - `step_name.custom_variable`



<!-- To access context variables within your step functions, use the `get_run_context()` function: -->

<CodeBlock language="python" code={`async def check_status():
    status = get_run_context().get_data("process_user_data.user_status")
    print(f"Your current status is: {status}")


workflow = (Workflow(name='user_workflow')
    .step(process_user_data, user_id="user_123")
    .step(send_notification, message="Welcome!", user="user_123")
    .step(check_status)
)`}/>

Commit message:

docs: update sidebar structure, enhance events documentation with tracing details, and refine workflow context explanations

docs/docs/workflows/context.md, after:

---
title: Context 
sidebar: 'docsSidebar'
---
import CodeBlock from '@site/src/theme/CodeBlock';

# Context

<h2 className="subtitle" style={{marginTop: '-17px', fontSize: '1.1rem', fontWeight: 'normal'}}>
Share data between Workflow steps.
</h2>

---


## Step Variables

Every step in a workflow has access to two built-in variables:

- **`.input`**: Contains all the parameters passed to the step. They are accessed through their name.
- **`.output`**: Contains the value(s) returned by the step. Can be a single value, dictionary, array, or custom class.

Additionally, **custom variables** can be linked to a step using the [`get_run_context().set_data`](#the-get_run_context-function) method.

<CodeBlock language="python" highlight="6" code ={`import asyncio
import datetime
from timbal import Workflow, get_run_context

async def process_user_data(user_id: str):
    get_run_context().set_data(".user_status", "active")
    return f"Processed user: {user_id}"

async def send_notification(message: str, user: str):
    timestamp = datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
    return [message, user, timestamp]


workflow = (Workflow(name='user_workflow')
    .step(process_user_data, user_id="user_123")
    .step(send_notification, message="Welcome!", user="user_123")
)`}/>

After the workflow runs, each step has the following variables:

#### `process_user_data`:
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`.input.user_id       = 'user_123'
.output              = 'Processed user: user_123'
.user_status         = 'active'`}/>

#### `send_notification`:
<CodeBlock language="python" code={`.input.message       = 'Welcome!'
.input.user          = 'user_123'
.output[0]           = 'Welcome!'
.output[1]           = 'user_123'
.output[2]           = '2025-01-15 14:30:25'`}/>


## Accessing the Context
### The `get_run_context()` Method
This function provides access to the current run context and allows you to read and write data that can be shared across workflow steps.

- **`get_data(path)`**:
  - Returns the value from the specified path.
  - Example: `get_run_context().get_data(".input.user_id")`

- **`set_data(path, value)`**:
  - Creates or updates the value at the given path.
  - Data persists and can be accessed by other steps.
  - Example: `get_run_context().set_data(".user_status", "active")`


### Variable Access
Context paths use a hierarchical structure, enabling each step to access both its own variables and those from other steps within the workflow.

- **Current step**: Use `.` to access variables from the current step
  - `.input.parameter_name`
  - `.output`
  - `.custom_variable`

- **Parent step**: Use `..` to access data from the parent run in the workflow
  - `..output`
  - `..custom_variable`

- **Neighbour steps**: Use the step name to access data from any neighbour step
  - `step_name.output`
  - `step_name.custom_variable`



<!-- To access context variables within your step functions, use the `get_run_context()` function: -->

<CodeBlock language="python" highlight="2" code={`async def check_status():
    status = get_run_context().get_data("process_user_data.user_status")
    print(f"Your current status is: {status}")

workflow = (Workflow(name='user_workflow')
    .step(process_user_data, user_id="user_123")
    .step(send_notification, message="Welcome!", user="user_123")
    .step(check_status)
)`}/>
