docs_mintlify/workflows/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Build multi-step AI pipelines using Workflows"
---

## What Are Workflows?

Workflows are programmable execution pipelines that **orchestrate step-by-step processing with explicit control flow**.

```python 
from timbal.core import Workflow

workflow = Workflow(name="my_workflow")
```

This creates a basic workflow. Next, add steps to build your pipeline.

## Building Blocks of a Workflow: Steps

Steps are the core units of work, which can process data, perform actions and pass results onward.

### Adding Steps to the Workflow

Use `.step()` to add steps to workflows. **Any Runnable is valid to create a step**.

```python
def celsius_to_fahrenheit(celsius: float) -> float:
    return (celsius * 9/5) + 32

def check_threshold(temperature: float, threshold: float) -> str:
    return "Alert!" if temperature > threshold else "Normal"
    
workflow = (Workflow(name="temperature_alert")
    .step(celsius_to_fahrenheit, celsius=35)
    .step(check_threshold, temperature=80, threshold=lambda: 85)
)
```

### Step Names and Reusing Functions

**Each step in a workflow must have a unique name**. Like all Runnables, steps are identified by their names, which must be distinct within the workflow.

To use the same function multiple times in a workflow, wrap it in a new Tool with a distinct name for each usage:

```python
# Create a Tool to reuse the function
threshold_checker_tool = Tool(
    name="threshold_checker",
    handler=check_threshold
)

workflow = (Workflow(name="temperature_monitoring", temperature=80)
    .step(celsius_to_fahrenheit, celsius=35)
    .step(check_threshold, threshold=lambda: 85)
    .step(threshold_checker_tool, threshold=lambda: 100)
)
```

## Running the Workflow

You can run your Workflow in two different ways:

**Get the final output:**
```python
result = await workflow().collect()
print(result.output)
```

**Stream events as they happen:**
```python
async for event in workflow():
    print(event)
```

## Key Features
- **Composition**: Workflows can contain other workflows
- **Parallel Execution**: Independent steps run concurrently
- **Type Safety**: Automatic parameter validation via Pydantic
- **Error Isolation**: Failed steps skip dependents, others continue

Check [Context](/workflows/context.md) for data sharing between steps, and [Control Flow](/workflows/control_flow.md) for different step execution behaviors.

Commit message:

docs: add branching workflow and update context documentation

docs_mintlify/workflows/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "Overview"
description: "Build multi-step AI pipelines using Workflows"
---

## What Are Workflows?

Workflows are programmable execution pipelines that **orchestrate step-by-step processing with explicit control flow**.
The following line creates an empty workflow, ready for steps to be added:

```python 
from timbal.core import Workflow

workflow = Workflow(name="my_workflow")
```

## Building Blocks of a Workflow: Steps

Steps are the core units of work, which can process data, perform actions and pass results onward.

### Adding Steps to the Workflow

Use `.step()` to add steps to workflows. **Any Runnable is valid to create a step**.

```python
def celsius_to_fahrenheit(celsius: float) -> float:
    return (celsius * 9/5) + 32

def check_threshold(temperature: float, threshold: float) -> str:
    return "Alert!" if temperature > threshold else "Normal"
    
workflow = (Workflow(name="temperature_alert")
    .step(celsius_to_fahrenheit, celsius=35)
    .step(check_threshold, temperature=80, threshold=lambda: 85)
)
```

### Step Names and Reusing Functions

**Each step in a workflow must have a unique name**. Like all Runnables, steps are identified by their names, which must be distinct within the workflow.

To use the same function multiple times in a workflow, wrap it in a new Tool with a distinct name for each usage:

```python
# Create a Tool to reuse the function
threshold_checker_tool = Tool(
    name="threshold_checker",
    handler=check_threshold
)

workflow = (Workflow(name="temperature_monitoring", temperature=80)
    .step(celsius_to_fahrenheit, celsius=35)
    .step(check_threshold, threshold=lambda: 85)
    .step(threshold_checker_tool, threshold=lambda: 100)
)
```

## Running the Workflow

You can run your workflow in two different ways:

**Getting the final output:**
```python
result = await workflow().collect()
print(result.output)
```

**Streaming events as they happen:**
```python
async for event in workflow():
    print(event)
```

## Key Features
- **Composition**: Workflows can contain other workflows
- **Parallel Execution**: Independent steps run concurrently
- **Type Safety**: Automatic parameter validation via Pydantic
- **Error Isolation**: Failed steps skip dependents, others continue

Check [Control Flow](/workflows/control-flow) and [Branching](/workflows/branching) for different step execution behaviors.
