docs/quickstart.mdx, before:

---
title: "Quickstart"
description: "Build your first AI Agent with Timbal in a few lines of code"
---

In this quickstart guide we're going to see how to build an AI agent with Timbal. We'll start from scratch and gradually enhance it with advanced features. Let's dive in!

Before moving forward, ensure you've completed the [installation steps](/installation).

## Create a Timbal Project

Run the following Timbal CLI command to create a new project:

```bash
timbal init my-project --agent
```

This creates a simple project structure with all the necessary files and dependencies to get started building an agent. If you want to build a workflow, you can use the `--workflow` flag instead. You can check all the options by running any `timbal` command with the `--help` flag.

### Project Structure

After running the command, your project will look like this:

<img
  src="/images/project-structure.png"
  alt="Project structure"
  style={{width: '300px'}}
  noZoom
  className="rounded-lg"
/>
| File | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| **.venv** | Python virtual environment directory (automatically created) |
| **.dockerignore** | Docker configuration for containerized deployment |
| **agent.py** | Main application file where you define your AI agents and workflows.<br/>If you create a workflow, you'll have a `workflow.py` file instead |
| **pyproject.toml** | Python project configuration and dependency management |
| **timbal.yaml** | Timbal deployment configuration and settings |
| **uv.lock** | Dependency lock file for reproducible builds |

Timbal automatically sets up a Python virtual environment using `uv`. You can manage your project dependencies using `uv` commands just like in any other Python project. For example:

```bash
uv add package-name
```

This makes it easy to add new packages and manage your project's dependencies.

<Tip>
You have your project structure set up. Next, you only need to edit the `agent.py` file to customize your agent's behavior and capabilities.
</Tip>

## Build a simple Agent

Let's create a simple agent with the `Agent` class:

```python agent.py icon="python"
from timbal import Agent

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5-mini"
)
```

<Info>
You'll need to set the appropriate environment variables for your chosen model (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY`). Store these in a `.env` file and never commit them to version control.
</Info>

We can add the following boilerplate to our script to interact with the agent in the terminal:

```python
async def main():
    while True:
        prompt = input("User: ")
        if prompt == "q":
            break
        agent_output_event = await agent(prompt=prompt).collect()
        print(f"Agent: {agent_output_event.output}") # noqa: T201

if __name__ == "__main__":
    import asyncio
    asyncio.run(main())
```

You can learn more about the Agent class and all the available options in the [Agents](/agents) section.

<Tip>
You've just created your first Timbal agent. Next, you can add any type of tools to it to make it more powerful.
</Tip>

## Adding Tools

Agents become powerful with tools.
In Timbal, you can use both **baked-in tools** (pre-built and ready to use) and **custom tools** (functions you write yourself).

### Baked-in Tools

Timbal includes several ready-to-use tools. For example, the `WebSearch` tool allows your agent to search the internet for real-time information:

```python agent.py icon="python"
from timbal import Agent
from timbal.tools import WebSearch

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5-mini",
    tools=[WebSearch()]
)
```

### Custom Tools

Creating custom tools is straightforward—just write a function. Here's a simple example that returns the current date and time:

```python agent.py icon="python"
from datetime import datetime

from timbal import Agent
from timbal.tools import WebSearch

def get_datetime() -> str:
    return datetime.now().strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5-mini",
    tools=[WebSearch(), get_datetime]
)
```

You can combine any number of tools to create powerful, specialized agents. 
Mix and match baked-in and custom tools to fit your specific use case.
You can even use agents and workflows as tools!

<Tip>
**Congratulations!** You've built a fully functional AI agent with tools in just a few lines of code.

Ready to explore more? Check out our [examples](/examples), or browse the latest code samples on <a href="https://github.com/timbal-ai/timbal" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">GitHub</a>.
</Tip>

## Moving to Production

Ready to take your agent to production? Timbal provides enterprise-grade deployment options designed for real-world applications.

Whether you need fully managed hosting or complete infrastructure control, we've got you covered. Check out our comprehensive [deployment guide](/deployment) to explore your options and choose the best approach for your needs.

Commit message:

docs: update quickstart and evals documentation

docs/quickstart.mdx, after:

---
title: "Quickstart"
description: "Build your first AI Agent with Timbal in a few lines of code"
---

In this quickstart guide we're going to see how to build an AI agent with Timbal. We'll start from scratch and gradually enhance it with advanced features. Let's dive in!

Before moving forward, ensure you've completed the [installation steps](/installation).

## Create a Timbal Project

Run the following Timbal CLI command to create a new project:

```bash
timbal create my-project
```

This will prompt you interactively to choose what you want to build (Agent or Workflow) and what UI you want for your project. After making your selections, it creates a project structure with all the necessary files and dependencies to get started.

### Project Structure

After running the command, your project will look like this:

```
my-project/
├── api/              - Elysia API server (Bun)
├── workforce/        - Your timbal components (Python)
│   └── <name>/
│       ├── agent.py  - Main app logic (or workflow.py for workflows)
│       ├── timbal.yaml    - Timbal configuration
│       └── pyproject.toml - Python dependencies
├── ui/               - React + Vite + TypeScript + shadcn (Bun) [optional]
├── .gitignore        - Git ignore file
└── README.md         - Project documentation
```

| Directory/File | Purpose |
|---------------|---------|
| **api/** | Elysia API server running on Bun |
| **workforce/** | Your timbal components (Python). Contains subdirectories for each agent or workflow |
| **workforce/\<name\>/agent.py** | Main application file where you define your AI agents.<br/>If you create a workflow, you'll have a `workflow.py` file instead |
| **workforce/\<name\>/pyproject.toml** | Python project configuration and dependency management |
| **workforce/\<name\>/timbal.yaml** | Timbal deployment configuration and settings |
| **ui/** | React + Vite + TypeScript + shadcn running on Bun (only if UI is selected) |

<Tip>
You have your project structure set up. Next, you only need to edit the `agent.py` file (or `workflow.py` for workflows) in the `workforce/<name>/` directory to customize your agent's behavior and capabilities.
</Tip>

## Build a simple Agent

Let's create a simple agent with the `Agent` class:

```python agent.py icon="python"
from timbal import Agent

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5-mini"
)
```

<Info>
You'll need to set the appropriate environment variables for your chosen model (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY`). Store these in a `.env` file and never commit them to version control.
</Info>

We can add the following boilerplate to our script to interact with the agent in the terminal:

```python
async def main():
    while True:
        prompt = input("User: ")
        if prompt == "q":
            break
        agent_output_event = await agent(prompt=prompt).collect()
        print(f"Agent: {agent_output_event.output}") # noqa: T201

if __name__ == "__main__":
    import asyncio
    asyncio.run(main())
```

You can learn more about the Agent class and all the available options in the [Agents](/agents) section.

<Tip>
You've just created your first Timbal agent. Next, you can add any type of tools to it to make it more powerful.
</Tip>

## Adding Tools

Agents become powerful with tools.
In Timbal, you can use both **baked-in tools** (pre-built and ready to use) and **custom tools** (functions you write yourself).

### Baked-in Tools

Timbal includes several ready-to-use tools. For example, the `WebSearch` tool allows your agent to search the internet for real-time information:

```python agent.py icon="python"
from timbal import Agent
from timbal.tools import WebSearch

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5-mini",
    tools=[WebSearch()]
)
```

### Custom Tools

Creating custom tools is straightforward—just write a function. Here's a simple example that returns the current date and time:

```python agent.py icon="python"
from datetime import datetime

from timbal import Agent
from timbal.tools import WebSearch

def get_datetime() -> str:
    return datetime.now().strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")

agent = Agent(
    name="my_agent",
    model="openai/gpt-5-mini",
    tools=[WebSearch(), get_datetime]
)
```

You can combine any number of tools to create powerful, specialized agents. 
Mix and match baked-in and custom tools to fit your specific use case.
You can even use agents and workflows as tools!

<Tip>
**Congratulations!** You've built a fully functional AI agent with tools in just a few lines of code.

Ready to explore more? Check out our [examples](/examples), or browse the latest code samples on <a href="https://github.com/timbal-ai/timbal" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">GitHub</a>.
</Tip>

## Moving to Production

Ready to take your agent to production? Timbal provides enterprise-grade deployment options designed for real-world applications.

Whether you need fully managed hosting or complete infrastructure control, we've got you covered. Check out our comprehensive [deployment guide](/deployment) to explore your options and choose the best approach for your needs.
